98 LUCRETJUS. BOOK V.

1077. et: see n. to‘l. 1066. sic, ‘casually’; οὑτωσί is similarly
used: the sic os l. 970 is rather different. alias is the adverb.

1078. Comp. 1. 801, and see nn. there.

1080. salsum is used as a noun; comp. tranquillum, l. η.

victum vitamque: see n. to l. 804.

1081. It seems very probable that a line is lost after voces3 ‘they
utter different eries at different times' is a sentence complete in itsels,
which cannot be properly connected with the following line. The lost
line may have begun with et quom, (which would account for its disap-
pemance), and have described some peaceful cry of sea-birds: e.g. et
quom progeniem parvam nidosque revisunt.

1083. partim, ‘ some birds' ; see n. to l. 840. tempestatibus. ‘the
weather'. una: adv.

1087. semus, ‘feelings’.

1088. tamen is out of place, as it really goes with emittere ; ὅμως is
sometimes similarly placed, e. g. Aesch. Theb. 699 πείθου γυναιξὶν
καίπερ οὒ στέργων ὅμως.

1091-1104. Men may have got fire first from tlte lzgrlztningor from
the rubbing of trees against one another ; they learned to cook their
food by observing the effict of tlte sun's heat upon things growing in
tlte fields.

It is evident that this paragraph and the two which follow are
subsequent additions of the poet: they do not fit in properly here and
are inconsistent with what goes before and comes after; see n. to
l. 101 1.

1091. in his rebus, ‘herein'; sol. 247. neforte requiras: see n.
to l. 1¹4·

1092. ignem: see n. to l. 1011.

1093. inde=ab eo, i.e. afulmine.

1095. fulgere: see n. to scatit, l. 40. caeli plaga must be dis·
tinguished from ponti plaga, 1. 481.

1096. et...tamen, ‘ and all the same ’, i.e. if we leave the lightning
out of account, there is another explanation to our hand; et tamen is
thus used, ll. 213, 768, 1125, 1177. cum: conjunction.

1097. aestuat, ‘ is tossed ’-

1100. mutua is used as an adv„ like acerba, l. 33 ς virgil (Aen. vii
66) uses per mutua. dum, ‘as ⁹, is eausal, as osten with pres. ind.

1101. utrumque, i.e. either lightning or the friction of trees.

